RFC(storybook): Structural proposals to organize stories for E2E (#18895)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/convergence/authoring-stories.md

### 5. how to author e2e suites for those stories

> This section assumes that the storybook stories forms the core documentation of Fluent converged.
> This may change in the future so the measures proposed in this section might no longer be relevant
> if this assumption is no longer true.

> `react-menu` already has entire test suites dedicated to testing against storybook. Since each PR build will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`react-menu` already has entire test suites dedicated to testing against storybook. Since each PR will build and
```

> deploy a storybook, the cypress testing solution for converged components will test against the PR storybook. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deploy a storybook (storybook build for `react-components` package), the e2e suite (implemented with cypress) for converged components will execute against current PR deployed storybook instance. This
```

includes the constraint that until a component is added to `react-components` it cannot be tested in CI.

The e2e testing solution for `react-menu` can be used for any converged component using storybook, and is also used by
`react-accordion` and `react-popover`. The purposes of E2E tests currently is to run internaction tests against the browser.
Visual regression tests are handled by screener in `app-vrtests` and is out of the scope of this RFC.

> We propose to write an NX workspace generator to setup the e2e testing folder structure and dependencies for each package. The process is quite simple currently but still needs to be done manually.

Author: We can move to separate project, in another proposal since it changes more drastically the architecture of the repo. I'm just trying to build on what is already there.

> We propose to write an NX workspace generator to setup the e2e testing folder structure and dependencies for each package. The process is quite simple currently but still needs to be done manually.

Reviewer: > it changes more drastically the architecture of the repo

thats a bit exaggerated don't you think ? :) from my POV its a straightforward change, but sure let's address this in separate RFC/proposal

How to write E2E tests is out of the scope of the RFC. Testing is encouraged to use publicly viewable stories as much as possible. However there will be edge cases and scenarios that will be tested which require stories that are accessible to the E2E test runner but not viewable by public consumers. We provide a proposal to handle this in a later section in this RFC.

### 6. dissecting big story files into smaller ones

> For easier maintainability, each story should be in its own file. Common utilities can be shared in their own modules.

Author: Alright, so your proposal is that we keep one single story file for each component ?

> For easier maintainability, each story should be in its own file. Common utilities can be shared in their own modules.

Reviewer 2: Probably. I think it’s best to have one story file, but we could still import story functions from other files (that wouldn’t have the `.stories.tsx` extension). I need like one more week to try it out and formulate a proposal. Do you see any downsides to this approach right now?

> For easier maintainability, each story should be in its own file. Common utilities can be shared in their own modules.

Author: As you say `Button` has many stories, however in the `Menu` case there are equally as many stories but the stories are longer and more complicated and soe stories need the use of components outside the story export itself. 

`Menu.stories.tsx` contains 11 stories in a file that is 400 lines long, we can keep it, but it might continue to grow especially is we want to test stories that are not part of the public documentation

We need to make sure that no code used in stories accidentally leak into the exported package. To make this more explicit
in the repo, all colocated stories and related code should be stored under a `/stories` folder in the package. Below is
an example of the proposed file tree:

```
packages/react-menu/

> ├─ stories/

Author: Colocation could be messy, since it can really blow up the number of files in the package: check #18627

> ├─ stories/

Reviewer: > Colocation could be messy,

I understand your concern but I don't think that is a valid argument. you can say the same for testing files right? -> from my experience consistency is usually the best approach (collocation in our case).

On the second thought maybe having those internal stories separated would make sense ? as they are not "relevant" to particular story implementation ?

│  ├─ Menu/
│    ├─ Default.stories.tsx
│    ├─ Controlled.stories.tsx
│  ├─ MenuList/
│    ├─ Default.stories.tsx
│    ├─ WithIcons.stories.tsx
│  ├─ tmp-icons.tsx
├─ src/
│  ├─ index.js
├─ .gitignore
├─ package.json
├─ README.md
├─ Spec.md
```

The name of each `stories` file should be the name of the story in storybook, for easy searching in the IDE. Since we follow
`Component Story Format (CSF)` a different folder should be used for each component in storybook.

We should invest in creating lint rules and automation that will enforce this file structure and guarantee imports
from storybook related code do not leak into the package.

### 7. how structure stories in the storybook nav tree

> > This section assumes that the storybook stories forms the core documentation of Fluent converged.

Author: Well we no longer need any of the proposals in this PR if that's the case, because we would never be showing consumers strange internal stories to test edge cases

> > This section assumes that the storybook stories forms the core documentation of Fluent converged.

Reviewer: not sure I follow

The `Default` story will be reserved and unique for each component. Each package can choose to document stories for each
component that is exported, as stated in the previous section.

#### Internal stories

As mentioned in for E2E testing, we should ensure maximum coverage for all publicly viewable stories by our consumers.
For more complex scenarios that need to be tested we should make sure that stories exist for E2E tests but should not be
easily accessible publicly.

Storybook has proposed a feature for this in [storybookjs/storybook](https://github.com/storybookjs/storybook/issues/9209)
which will configure stories to exist in deeplink URL format, but do not appear in the nav tree. As stated in the issue,
we can workaround before the release of this feature by modifying `manager-head.html` and set `display:none`for all
stories with a specific DOM `id` attribute. Storybook uses the `id` attribute for each link in the nav tree, and sets
the value to the story id.

We propose to use an extra filename extension and naming convention for internal stories:

```ts
// MenuTabstops.internal.stories.tsx

export const MenuTabstopsInternal = () => {
  // story

> };

Reviewer: just for clarification, can we mention (add to the example if needed) that those file will still need to follow storybooks `CSF`, thus containing default export?
